BOOK TITLE: The American Pageant: A History of the American People

CHAPTER 1: New World Beginnings (33,000 B.C.E.–1769 C.E.):
Several billion years ago, that whirling speck of dust known as the earth, fifth in
size among the planets, came into being.
About six thousand years ago—only a minute in geological time—recorded
history of the Western world began. Certain peoples of the Middle East, developing a written culture, gradually emerged from the haze of the past.
Five hundred years ago—only a few seconds figuratively speaking—European
explorers stumbled on the Americas. This dramatic accident forever altered the future
of both the Old World and the New, and of Africa and Asia as well (see Figure 1.1
on the next page).
THE SHAPING OF NORTH AMERICA
Planet earth took on its present form slowly. Some 225 million years ago, a single
supercontinent contained all the world’s dry land. Then enormous chunks of terrain
began to drift away from this colossal landmass, opening the Atlantic and Indian
Oceans, narrowing the Pacific Ocean, and forming the great continents of Eurasia,
Africa, Australia, Antarctica, and the Americas. The existence of a single original
continent has been proved in part by the discovery of nearly identical species of
fish that swim today in long-separated freshwater lakes throughout the world.
Continued shifting and folding of the earth’s crust thrust up mountain ranges. The
Appalachians were probably formed even before continental separation, perhaps 350
million years ago. The majestic ranges of western North America—the Rockies, the
Sierra Nevada, the Cascades, and the Coast Ranges—arose much more recently, geologically speaking, some 135 million to 25 million years ago. They are truly “American”
mountains, born after the continent took on its own separate geological identity.
By about 10 million years ago, nature had sculpted the basic geological shape
of North America. The continent was anchored in its northeastern corner by the
massive Canadian Shield—a zone undergirded by ancient rock, probably the first
part of what became the North American landmass to have emerged above sea
level. A narrow eastern coastal plain, or “tidewater” region, creased by many river
valleys, sloped gently upward to the timeworn ridges of the Appalachians. Those
ancient mountains slanted away on their western side into the huge midcontinental
basin that rolled downward to the Mississippi Valley bottom and then rose relentlessly to the towering peaks of the Rockies. From the Rocky Mountain crest—the
“roof of America”—the land fell off jaggedly into the intermountain Great Basin,
bounded by the Rockies on the east and the Sierra and Cascade ranges on the
west. The valleys of the Sacramento and San Joaquin Rivers and the Willamette–
Puget Sound trough seamed the interiors of present-day California, Oregon, and
Washington. The land at last met the foaming Pacific, where the Coast Ranges
rose steeply from the sea.
Nature laid a chill hand over much of this terrain in the Great Ice Age, beginning about 2 million years ago. Two-mile-thick ice sheets crept from the polar
regions to blanket parts of Europe, Asia, and the Americas. In North America the
great glaciers carpeted most of present-day Canada and the United States as far
southward as a line stretching from Pennsylvania through the Ohio Country and
the Dakotas to the Pacific Northwest.
When the glaciers finally retreated about 10,000 years ago, they left the North
American landscape transformed, and much as we know it today. The weight of the
gargantuan ice mantle had depressed the level of the Canadian Shield. The grinding
and flushing action of the moving and melting ice had scoured away the shield’s
topsoil, pitting its rocky surface with thousands of shallow depressions into which
the melting glaciers flowed to form lakes. The same glacial action scooped out and
filled the Great Lakes. They originally drained southward through the Mississippi
River system to the Gulf of Mexico. When the melting ice unblocked the Gulf of
St. Lawrence, the lake water sought the St. Lawrence River outlet to the Atlantic
Ocean, lowering the Great Lakes’ level and leaving the Missouri-Mississippi-Ohio
system to drain the enormous midcontinental basin between the Appalachians and
the Rockies. Similarly, in the West, water from the melting glaciers filled sprawling
Lake Bonneville, covering much of present-day Utah, Nevada, and Idaho. It drained to the Pacific Ocean through the Snake and Columbia River systems until diminishing rainfall from the ebbing ice cap lowered the water level, cutting off access to the
Snake River outlet. Deprived of both inflow and drainage, the giant lake became a
gradually shrinking inland sea. It grew increasingly saline, slowly evaporated, and
left an arid, mineral-rich desert. Only the Great Salt Lake remained as a relic of
Bonneville’s former vastness. Today Lake Bonneville’s ancient beaches are visible
on mountainsides up to 1,000 feet above the dry floor of the Great Basin.
PEOPLING THE AMERICAS
The Great Ice Age shaped more than the geological history of North America. It
also contributed to the origins of the continent’s human history. Though recent
(and still highly controversial) evidence suggests that some early peoples may have
reached the Americas in crude boats, most probably came by land. Some 35,000
years ago, the Ice Age congealed much of the world’s oceans into massive ice-pack
glaciers, lowering the level of the sea. As the sea level dropped, it exposed a land
bridge connecting Eurasia with North America in the area of the present-day Bering
Sea between Siberia and Alaska. Across that bridge, probably following migratory
herds of game, ventured small bands of nomadic Asian hunters—the “immigrant”
ancestors of the Native Americans. They continued to trek across the Bering
isthmus for some 250 centuries, slowly peopling the American continents.
As the Ice Age ended and the glaciers melted, the sea level rose again, inundating the land bridge about 10,000 years ago. Nature thus barred the door to further
immigration for many thousands of years, leaving this part of the human family
marooned for millennia on the now-isolated American continents.
Time did not stand still for these original Americans. The same climatic warming that melted the ice and drowned the bridge to Eurasia gradually opened ice-free
valleys through which vanguard bands groped their way southward and eastward
across the Americas. Roaming slowly through this awesome wilderness, they
eventually reached the far tip of South America, some 15,000 miles from Siberia.
By the time Europeans arrived in America in 1492, perhaps 54 million people
inhabited the two American continents.* Over the centuries they split into countless
tribes, evolved more than 2,000 separate languages, and developed many diverse
religions, cultures, and ways of life.
Incas in Peru, Mayans in Central America, and Aztecs in Mexico shaped
stunningly sophisticated civilizations. Their advanced agricultural practices, based
primarily on the cultivation of maize, which is Indian corn, fed large populations,
perhaps as many as 20 million in Mexico alone. Although without large draft
animals such as horses and oxen, and lacking even the simple technology of the
wheel, these peoples built elaborate cities and carried on far-flung commerce.
Talented mathematicians, they made strikingly accurate astronomical observations.
The Aztecs also routinely sought the favor of their gods by offering human sacrifices, cutting the hearts out of the chests of living victims, who were often captives
conquered in battle. By some accounts more than five thousand people were ritually
slaughtered to celebrate the crowning of one Aztec chieftain.
THE EARLIEST AMERICANS
Agriculture, especially corn growing, accounted for the size and sophistication of
the Native American civilizations in Mexico and South America. About 5000 B.C.E.
hunter-gatherers in highland Mexico developed a wild grass into the staple crop of
corn, which became their staff of life and the foundation of the complex, largescale, centralized Aztec and Incan civilizations that eventually emerged. Cultivation
of corn spread across the Americas from the Mexican heartland. Everywhere it was
planted, corn began to transform nomadic hunting bands into settled agricultural
villagers, but this process went forward slowly and unevenly.
Corn planting reached the present-day American Southwest as early as
2000 B.C.E. and powerfully molded Pueblo culture. The Pueblo peoples in the
Rio Grande valley constructed intricate irrigation systems to water their cornfields. They were dwelling in villages of multistoried, terraced buildings when
Spanish explorers made contact with them in the sixteenth century. (Pueblo
means “village” in Spanish.)
Corn cultivation reached other parts of North America considerably later. The
timing of its arrival in different localities explains much about the relative rates of
development of different Native American peoples. Throughout the continent to the
north and east of the land of the Pueblos, social life was less elaborately developed—
indeed “societies” in the modern sense of the word scarcely existed. No dense concentrations of population or complex nation-states comparable to the Aztec empire
existed in North America outside of Mexico at the time of the Europeans’ arrival—
one of the reasons for the relative ease with which the European colonizers subdued
the native North Americans.
The Mound Builders of the Ohio River valley, the Mississippian culture of the
lower Midwest, and the desert-dwelling Anasazi peoples of the Southwest did sustain some large settlements after the incorporation of corn planting into their ways
of life during the first millennium C.E. The Mississippian settlement at Cahokia,
near present-day East St. Louis, was at one time home to as many as twenty-five
thousand people. The Anasazis built an elaborate pueblo of more than six hundred
interconnected rooms at Chaco Canyon in modern-day New Mexico. But mysteriously, perhaps due to prolonged drought, all those ancient cultures fell into decline
by about 1300 C.E.
The cultivation of maize, as well as of high-yielding strains of beans and
squash, reached the southeastern Atlantic seaboard region of North America
about 1000 C.E. These plants made possible three-sister farming, with beans
growing on the trellis of the cornstalks and squash covering the planting mounds
to retain moisture in the soil. The rich diet provided by this environmentally clever
farming technique produced some of the highest population densities on the continent, among them the Creek, Choctaw, and Cherokee peoples.
The Iroquois in the northeastern woodlands, inspired by a legendary leader
named Hiawatha, created in the sixteenth century perhaps the closest North
American approximation to the great empires of Mexico and Peru. The Iroquois
Confederacy developed the political and organizational skills to sustain a robust
military alliance that menaced its neighbors, Native American and European
alike, for well over a century.
But for the most part, the native peoples of North America were living in small,
scattered, and impermanent settlements on the eve of the Europeans’ arrival. In
more settled agricultural groups, women tended the crops while men hunted, fished,
gathered fuel, and cleared fields for planting. This pattern of life frequently conferred substantial authority on women, and many North American native peoples,
including the Iroquois, developed matrilineal cultures, in which power and possessions passed down the female side of the family line.
Unlike the Europeans, who would soon arrive with the presumption that
humans had dominion over the earth and with the technologies to alter the
very face of the land, the Native Americans had neither the desire nor the
means to manipulate nature aggressively. They revered the physical world and
endowed nature with spiritual properties. Yet they did sometimes ignite massive forest fires, deliberately torching thousands of acres of trees to create better hunting habitats, especially for deer. This practice accounted for the open,
parklike appearance of the eastern woodlands that so amazed early European
explorers.
But in a broad sense, the land did not feel the hand of the Native Americans
heavy upon it, partly because they were so few in number. They were so thinly
spread across the continent that vast areas were virtually untouched by a human
presence. In the fateful year 1492, probably no more than 4 million Native
Americans padded through the whispering, primeval forests and paddled across
the sparkling, virgin waters of the continent north of Mexico. They were blissfully unaware that the historic isolation of the Americas was about to end forever, as the land and the native peoples alike felt the full shock of the European
“discovery.”
INDIRECT DISCOVERERS OF THE NEW WORLD
Europeans, for their part, were equally unaware of the existence of the Americas.
Blond-bearded Norse seafarers from Scandinavia had chanced upon the northeastern shoulder of North America about 1000 C.E. They landed at a place near L’Anse
aux Meadows in present-day Newfoundland that abounded in wild grapes, which
led them to name the spot Vinland. But no strong nation-state, yearning to expand,
supported these venturesome voyagers. Their flimsy settlements consequently were
soon abandoned, and their discovery was forgotten, except in Scandinavian saga
and song.
For several centuries thereafter, other restless Europeans, with the growing
power of ambitious governments behind them, sought contact with a wider world,
whether for conquest or trade. They thus set in motion the chain of events that led
to a drive toward Asia, the penetration of Africa, and the completely accidental discovery of the New World.
Christian crusaders must rank high among America’s indirect discoverers. Clad
in shining armor, tens of thousands of these European warriors tried from the
eleventh to the fourteenth century to wrest the Holy Land from Muslim control.
Foiled in their military assaults, the crusaders nevertheless acquired a taste for the
exotic delights of Asia. Goods that had been virtually unknown in Europe now
were craved—silk for clothing, drugs for aching flesh, perfumes for unbathed
bodies, colorful draperies for gloomy castles, and spices—especially sugar, a rare
luxury in Europe before the crusades—for preserving and flavoring food. Europe’s
developing sweet tooth would have momentous implications for world history.
The luxuries of the East were prohibitively expensive in Europe. They had to be
transported enormous distances from the Spice Islands (Indonesia), China, and
India, in creaking ships and on swaying camel back. The journey led across the
Indian Ocean, the Persian Gulf, and the Red Sea or along the tortuous caravan
routes of Asia or the Arabian Peninsula, ending at the ports of the eastern Mediterranean. Muslim middlemen exacted a heavy toll en route. By the time the strangesmelling goods reached Italian merchants at Venice and Genoa, they were so costly
that purchasers and profits alike were narrowly limited. European consumers and
distributors were naturally eager to find a less expensive route to the riches of
Asia or to develop alternate sources of supply.
EUROPEANS ENTER AFRICA
European appetites were further whetted when footloose Marco Polo, an Italian
adventurer, returned to Europe in 1295 and began telling tales of his nearly
twenty-year sojourn in China. Though he may in fact never have seen China
(legend to the contrary, the hard evidence is sketchy), he must be regarded as an
indirect discoverer of the New World, for his book, with its descriptions of rosetinted pearls and golden pagodas, stimulated European desires for a cheaper route
to the treasures of the East.
These accumulating pressures eventually brought a breakthrough for
European expansion. Before the middle of the fifteenth century, European sailors
refused to sail southward along the coast of West Africa because they could not
beat their way home against the prevailing northerly winds and south-flowing
currents. About 1450, Portuguese mariners overcame those obstacles. Not only
had they developed the caravel, a ship that could sail more closely into the wind,
but they had discovered that they could return to Europe by sailing northwesterly
from the African coast toward the Azores, where the prevailing westward breezes
would carry them home.
The new world of sub-Saharan Africa now came within the grasp of questing
Europeans. The northern shore of Africa, as part of the Mediterranean world, had
been known to Europe since antiquity. But because sea travel down the African
coast had been virtually impossible, Africa south of the forbidding Sahara Desert
barrier had remained remote and mysterious. African gold, perhaps two-thirds of
Europe’s supply, crossed the Sahara on camelback, and shadowy tales may have
reached Europe about the flourishing West African kingdom of Mali in the Niger
River valley, with its impressive Islamic university at Timbuktu. But Europeans
had no direct access to sub-Saharan Africa until the Portuguese navigators began
to creep down the West African coast in the middle of the fifteenth century.
The Portuguese promptly set up trading posts along the African shore for the
purchase of gold—and slaves. Arab flesh merchants and Africans themselves had
traded slaves for centuries before the Europeans arrived. The slavers routinely
charged higher prices for captives from distant sources, because they could not easily
flee to their native villages or be easily rescued by their kin. Slave brokers also deliberately separated persons from the same tribes and mixed unlike people together to
frustrate organized resistance. Thus from its earliest days, slavery by its very nature
inhibited the expression of regional African cultures and tribal identities.
The Portuguese adopted these Arab and African practices. They built up their
own systematic traffic in slaves to work the sugar plantations that Portugal, and
later Spain, established on the African coastal islands of Madeira, the Canaries,
São Tomé, and Principe. The Portuguese appetite for slaves was enormous and
dwarfed the modest scale of the pre-European traffic. Slave trading became a big
business. Some forty thousand Africans were carried away to the Atlantic sugar
islands in the last half of the fifteenth century. Millions more were to be wrenched
from their home continent after the discovery of the Americas. In these fifteenthcentury Portuguese adventures in Africa were to be found the origins of the modern
plantation system, based on large-scale commercial agriculture and the wholesale
exploitation of slave labor. This kind of plantation economy would shape the destiny of much of the New World.
The seafaring Portuguese pushed still farther southward in search of the water
route to Asia. Edging cautiously down the African coast, Bartholomeu Dias
rounded the southernmost tip of the “Dark Continent” in 1488. Ten years later
Vasco da Gama finally reached India (hence the name “Indies,” given by Europeans
to all the mysterious lands of the Orient) and returned home with a small but tantalizing cargo of jewels and spices.
Meanwhile, the kingdom of Spain became united—an event pregnant with
destiny—in the late fifteenth century. This new unity resulted primarily from the
marriage of two sovereigns, Ferdinand of Aragon and Isabella of Castile, and from
the brutal expulsion of the “infidel” Muslim Moors from Spain after centuries of
Christian-Islamic warfare. Glorying in their sudden strength, the Spaniards were
eager to outstrip their Portuguese rivals in the race to tap the wealth of the Indies.
To the south and east, Portugal controlled the African coast and thus controlled the
gateway to the round-Africa water route to India. Of necessity, therefore, Spain
looked westward.
COLUMBUS COMES UPON A NEW WORLD
The stage was now set for a cataclysmic shift in the course of history—the history
not only of Europe but of all the world. Europeans clamored for more and cheaper
products from the lands beyond the Mediterranean. Africa had been established as
a source of cheap slave labor for plantation agriculture. The Portuguese voyages
had demonstrated the feasibility of long-range ocean navigation. In Spain a modern
national state was taking shape, with the unity, wealth, and power to shoulder the
formidable tasks of discovery, conquest, and colonization. The dawn of the Renaissance in the fourteenth century nurtured an ambitious spirit of optimism and
adventure. Printing presses, introduced about 1450, facilitated the spread of
scientific knowledge. The mariner’s compass, possibly borrowed from the Arabs,
eliminated some of the uncertainties of sea travel. Meanwhile, across the ocean,
the unsuspecting New World innocently awaited its European “discoverers.”
Onto this stage stepped Christopher Columbus. This skilled Italian seafarer
persuaded the Spanish monarchs to outfit him with three tiny but seaworthy ships,
manned by a motley crew. Daringly, he unfurled the sails of his cockleshell craft
and headed westward. His superstitious sailors, fearful of venturing into the oceanic
unknown, grew increasingly mutinous. After six weeks at sea, failure loomed until,
on October 12, 1492, the crew sighted an island in the Bahamas. A new world thus
swam within the vision of Europeans.
Columbus’s sensational achievement obscures the fact that he was one of the
most successful failures in history. Seeking a new water route to the fabled Indies,
he in fact had bumped into an enormous land barrier blocking the ocean pathway.
For decades thereafter explorers strove to get through it or around it. The truth
gradually dawned that sprawling new continents had been discovered. Yet Columbus was at first so certain that he had skirted the rim of the “Indies” that he called
the native peoples Indians, a gross geographical misnomer that somehow stuck.
Columbus’s discovery would eventually convulse four continents—Europe,
Africa, and the two Americas. Thanks to his epochal voyage, an interdependent
global economic system emerged on a scale undreamed-of before he set sail. Its
workings touched every shore washed by the Atlantic Ocean. Europe provided the
markets, the capital, and the technology; Africa furnished the labor; and the New
World offered its raw materials, especially its precious metals and its soil for the
cultivation of sugar cane. For Europeans as well as for Africans and Native
Americans, the world after 1492 would never be the same, for better or worse.
WHEN WORLDS COLLIDE
Two ecosystems—the fragile, naturally evolved networks of relations among
organisms in a stable environment—commingled and clashed when Columbus
waded ashore. The reverberations from that historic encounter—often called the
Columbian exchange—echoed for centuries after 1492. The flora and fauna of the
Old and New Worlds had been separated for thousands of years. European
explorers marveled at the strange sights that greeted them, including exotic beasts
such as iguanas and “snakes with castanets” (rattlesnakes). Native New World
plants such as tobacco, maize, beans, tomatoes, and especially the lowly potato
eventually revolutionized the international economy as well as the European diet,
feeding the rapid population growth of the Old World. These foodstuffs were
among the most important Indian gifts to the Europeans and to the rest of the
world. Perhaps three-fifths of the crops cultivated around the globe today originated in the Americas. Ironically, the introduction into Africa of New World
foodstuffs like maize, manioc, and sweet potatoes may have fed an African population boom that numerically, though not morally, more than offset the losses
inflicted by the slave trade.
In exchange the Europeans introduced Old World crops and animals to the
Americas. Columbus returned to the Caribbean island of Hispaniola (present-day
Haiti and the Dominican Republic) in 1493 with seventeen ships that unloaded
twelve hundred men and a virtual Noah’s Ark of cattle, swine, and horses. The
horses soon reached the North American mainland through Mexico and in less than
two centuries had spread as far as Canada. North American Indian tribes like the
Apaches, Sioux, and Blackfeet swiftly adopted the horse, transforming their cultures
into highly mobile, wide-ranging hunter societies that roamed the grassy Great Plains
in pursuit of the shaggy buffalo. Columbus also brought seedlings of sugarcane,
which thrived in the warm Caribbean climate. A “sugar revolution” consequently
took place in the European diet, fueled by the forced migration of millions of Africans to work the canefields and sugar mills of the New World.
Unwittingly, the Europeans also brought other organisms in the dirt on their
boots and the dust on their clothes, such as the seeds of Kentucky bluegrass, dandelions, and daisies. Most ominous of all, in their bodies they carried the germs that
caused smallpox, yellow fever, and malaria. Indeed, Old World diseases would
quickly devastate the Native Americans. During the Indians’ millennia of isolation
in the Americas, most of the Old World’s killer maladies had disappeared from
among them. But generations of freedom from those illnesses had also wiped out
protective antibodies. Devoid of natural resistance to Old World sicknesses, Indians
died in droves. Within fifty years of the Spanish arrival, the population of the Taino
natives in Hispaniola dwindled from some 1 million people to about two hundred.
Enslavement and armed aggression took their toll, but the deadliest killers were
microbes, not muskets. The lethal germs spread among the New World peoples
with the speed and force of a hurricane, swiftly sweeping far ahead of the human
invaders; most of those afflicted never laid eyes on a European. In the centuries
after Columbus’s landfall, as many as 90 percent of the Native Americans perished,
a demographic catastrophe without parallel in human history. This depopulation
was surely not intended by the Spanish, but it was nevertheless so severe that entire
cultures and ancient ways of life were extinguished forever. Baffled, enraged, and
vengeful, Indian slaves sometimes kneaded tainted blood into their masters’ bread,
to little effect. Perhaps it was poetic justice that the Indians unintentionally did take
a kind of revenge by infecting the early explorers with syphilis, injecting that lethal
sexually transmitted disease for the first time into Europe.